The boys were all in uniform, even the physically
unfit boys wore a uniform with a NM on the collar,
meaning non-military. There were no women on the
campus other than secretaries, and even some of
the department heads had male secretaries at that
time. Before we start talking about Texas A&M,
could I ask you a question about your decision to go
into veterinarian sciences? Was it just because
you grew up with these cattle, and was it because
you had a neighbor who was a veterinarian, or were
there other reasons? Well, that was the primary
reason. Who knows why a kid wants to be a college
clown, a circus clown, or a railway engineer or
whatnot? Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. The biggest thrill I
ever got was when we went out and old Sal was trying
to have pigs and the veterinarian's hand was too
big. And I went in and pulled the pigs out and I got
two dollars. I got it for that. He charged five and
he gave me two because I could help him. And then he
showed me how to clean out a horse's hoof and things
like that. And all three years I worked in the
foundry, I still had the back of my mind that I was
going to be a veterinarian someday. Of course,
they'd give me hands and arms.
Were there, when you were working in the foundry,
were there any other professions that you ever
considered? No. No, in fact, when I went to Kansas
State, they offered me a year's
what do you call it, credit in engineering because
of my foundry experience. I'd taken
correspondence course while I worked in the
foundry, metalurgy and so forth, but I always
wanted to be a veterinarian. Okay, okay. Now can
you explain your exactly what your functions or
duties were when you came to Texas A&M? I helped Dr.
Smith. Oh, you were his assistant. Yeah. I don't
know whether you know it or not, but at that time
there were three distinct entities on the A&M
campus. There was the Texas Agriculture
Experiment Station, there was the Texas
Agriculture Extension Service, And there was a
teaching college. And each one had its own
separate head. And each one went to the
legislature for its appropriation. So in other
words, for example, we had a Department of
Veterinary, of Dairy Science. We had an
Experimentation Dairy Science. And we had an
Extension Service Dairyman. They were not
related to each other at all, administratively.
Of course informally, there was a lot of give and
take. Right,
right. But
we worked in the Veterinary Science Department of
the Texas Ag God's Experimentation We worked on
various diseases, including anthrax,
brucellosis,
mineral deficiencies, and parasitism.
And Dr. Smith was primarily interested in
pathology and mineral deficiencies. And he
didn't care much for parasites.
He gave that to me as my baby.
And I became intensely interested in it and worked
out a master's degree in biology because at that
time there were no master's degrees in the School
of Veterinary Medicine. It was a school. It wasn't
a college. It was a school.
And
in 1937, they established a Department of
Veterinary Parastrology in the School of
Veterinary Medicine. A Dr. H.L. Van We
were on the same floor, the top floor of old Francis
Hall.
And I often went to him with my problems
and also helped him with some of his. So I got I
should say I obtained quite a bit of formal
parasitology without even realizing it.
And often I would take his classes when he was ill or
out of town or whatnot. And the more I
delved into it, the more I became interested. 1938
I
got a hearing aid and the whole world immediately
changed its aspect. This was a cumbersome thing.
The receiver was about three to six inches by an
inch and a half and the battery pack weighed about a
pound. So I had Johnny
or what that Houston, Johnny Holly,
built a harness for me.
Resembled nothing in the world more than an
underarm holster to carry the batteries. And we
were at State Fair in 1939, my wife and I going
around gawking, and a fella came up next to me He
said, I'd like to see you for a minute. Well, he
looked like he was big enough to.
At least he impressed me, and I said, well, what
about? He showed me his shield, and he said, let's
step in here a minute. He said, will you kindly
unbutton your shirt? He thought I was wearing a
gun. Really? Under my left. A shoulder holster.
Yeah. That's what it really, that's what it looked
like. Well, with that hearing aid, I was quite
relieved when I answered the telephone and I'd
take the receiver and put it against the
receiver's telephone against my receiver. I
remember I was over at Livingston one night and I
wanted to make a call and I took the receiver and put
it against my hearing aid and started talking to
the the transmitter. A little Mexican boy went
nuts there trying to tell me, no, no, no, you don't
use it that way. I finally opened my shirt and
showed him. He said, oh. And I've had people come to
my office and I had a piece of foam rubber in the top
drawer of my desk. And when the telephones rang, it
was one of them old fast ones that The receiver hung
on the stand, you know. I'd take the receiver off
and drop it in the desk so I could lean against it.
And I'd just talk into the telephone. And the time a
county agent came in, the little boy, oh, he was
little, I'd say he was 10 or 11. Phone rang and I
said, pardon me a minute. I took the receiver off
and dropped it in the desk drawer and leaned
against it and started talking. I had my hand free
to use my pencil. The kid looked up and said, I'll be
goddamned.
So then I explained to him what I was doing. And I'd
go out to examine the animal. I had an extra long
cord on it. I'd take it off and put it against the
animal and use it as a test scope. And it worked
better than any I've ever had since.
Well, 1943.
Dr. Van Valkenburg died suddenly of a heart
attack.
And they offered the department to me. Actually,
it was just a one-man department.
But
I was making $3,600 a year with the experiment
station. The authority department was 4,500 so I
took it with no regrets. Dr. Smith was rather
impatient
with me but after all I'd worked for him nine years
and I decided I could handle teaching with a
hearing aid. So then
Things rocked along.
What were you teaching then? Peristalsis.
Veterinary peristalsis. And also infectious and
non-infectious diseases.
Okay, now can we stop for a moment and talk about
teaching and the curriculum back in the 1930s and
the early 1940s. Was there an overall aim of the vet
program at that time? Well, the overall aim then
was primarily to turn out practitioners. Right.
And they were, as I recall, six departments. There
was bacteriology.
Dr. Dunn,
pathology doctor. What's that guy's name?
Anyway, Dr. Jaggi was brought in in 1937 on public
health. I was teaching parapsychology. Dr. Lent
was teaching clinic.
I can't think of the pathologist's name.
I'll think of it after a while. Anyway, Dr.
Marsteller was dean,
and he also helped in the clinic.
And since parasitology was only two, three-hour
courses, I also helped in the clinic.
In infected and non-infected diseases.
Then the war came along
and we went up on what you call the speed-up
program. We took in a class every four months.
Instead of one every year? Yeah. Well, why was
that? Well, there weren't but about six or eight
students in the class.
So some years, we had graduations three times a
year. In other words, the class of 45, some
graduated in February and some along in April or
May and some in September.
And the entire veterinary faculty was reduced to
about 12 people. From what was it before then,
before the war? Oh, about 15 or 20, I imagine.
Pardon
me. I'll tell you how many there are now. Pardon me,
I have to go to the bathroom. Fine.
The name of the pathologist was Wharton,
W-H-A-R-T-O-N.
Now getting back to the war, did the war, did the
war, was the federal government interested in
increasing the number of veterinarians? Is that
why you tripled the program? No. We were just
trying to get enough credit hours on the books to
get our paper from the state. In other words, we
just had six boys in the class.
Well, how did you, how did you, uh... I don't really
know the reason for it. I was just a, I was an old man
on a toilet bowl then. But I do know that we took, you
can probably find someplace else, quiet. Yeah,
okay, fine. But, fact remains, we took in the class
every, every four months. Okay. In other, in any
other ways did the war affect the vet school or your
position? Well no, except that of course we had
trouble getting supplies and we had instructors
leaving because they were in the reserve or draft.
For example, Dr. Armstead, Dr. Spangler, a whole
bunch of them.
went in as officers. That's why we're down to about
12, or at the most, 14.
Now getting back to the aim of the vet program, what
did you think back in the late 1930s were the strong
and weak points? Well. 1930s see I didn't come here
in 36. Well that's yeah the late 1930s. And I was in
Experiment Station until 1943 so
I really didn't have too much to do with it except
that of course Experiment Station would try to
find out why things happened. Sure. And try to
elaborate or devise a message of bringing disease
under control, the
good of veterinary medicine, I said, was
primarily interested in turning out
practitioners. In fact, Dr. Marks used to say, get
the boys out with the animals. You can look at them
flies on a cloudy day. And he took a rather dim view
of laboratory procedures as such.
but I don't really know. Actually the school
didn't begin to really boom until after the war
when the GIs came back. Now when you started
teaching in 1943,
let's talk for a minute about what courses you were
teaching. Well I was teaching But in their
parasitology, which includes the general
conception of what parasites are, then parasites
is a dog and cat, and parasites are cattle, and
parasites are oranges, parasites are runes,
sheep, goats, and cattle. So it
was Active economic parasitology.
Let's see what...
Oh, I see. Parasites and parasitic disease.
That's the last one out.
It's a lot more complicated than the average
person thinks. Oh, looks tremendously
complicated to me.
What were the major, back in
those days, what were the major problems in the
field with the parasites? I mean, which were the
major diseases that you were working to overcome?
The parasites in cattle and horses primarily,
since cattle were the mainstay of the Texas
ranchers.
and that includes knowledge of the drugs and the
dosages. We did a lot of work on trying out new
drugs. In fact, the first
doses of several commonly used drugs were first at
Texas A&M. For example? Yeah. Well,
Oh, you have to watch
me. Phenothiazine, for example.
We were the first to show that phenothiazine could
be poisonous to horses.
When about was that? Oh, that was the 1940s. 1950s,
thiobenzol, which is a common wormer.
We also taught external parasites as well,
horseflies, spaceflies, cattle grubs, lice,
mites,
I would think that this would be one of the very
important parts of the School of Veterinary
Medicine because one of the main reasons it was
founded was because of the parasitic problem with
tick fever. That's right. And I saw the last group
of cattle treated for tick fever over in
Liberty County in 1936, shortly after I came here.
At that time, we used arsenical dips. Of course, at
the present time, it would be absolutely
impossible to eradicate the Texas fever ticks
because the
federal government wouldn't let you use a
compound as poisonous as arsenic. But we didn't
know it, and we went ahead and got rid of it anyway.
Trying to find the... How did the cattle withstand
this dipping in arsenic? Well, if it was done
properly, there wasn't too much danger, but if
they got a little bit too strong, of course you got
arsenical burns, and there's no doubt that some of
them died
because they were weak and poor and The actual
physical trauma of running them through a dipping
vat didn't do them any good.
I'm trying to find the...
Oh, too much trouble. Look at that. I do want to show
you something, though.
I'm a contributor to the last issue of the Merck
Manual. I've helped them since it started. When
did this start? This is the Merck Veterinarian
Manual. I don't know. I believe that's the fifth
issue. Maybe it's the fourth issue. That's the
last one. Don't tell which issue it is. Fifth.
Fifth, yeah. It's the last. It's the most recent
one.
I worked on that last summer. I have another
question about when you started teaching back in
1943. Can you describe the students? Yes. The
students were, as a rule, much more serious than
the general college. Most
of them came and took veterinary medicine because
they wanted to be a veterinarian. not for any
financial gain or whatnot. And it seemed to me like
a lot of them, predominant,
I believe, were people who had been closely
associated with veterinary medicine, either
their dad was a veterinarian or their uncle was a
veterinarian or they had a brother who was a
veterinarian or whatnot. But veterinary
students have always been I don't know, less your
college, you know the way I see it, than the
students as a whole. More serious. More serious.
And veterinary medicine has always been pretty
much of a tough course. We used to say the only
curriculum that was worse than veterinary
medicine was taking up all the students' time was
architecture. Because the architects have to do
all their drawings and plans and things and have to
take engineering and stresses and strains and
so they were the only ones really that we felt like
had to work as hard as we did. Were there at this time
back in the 1940s were there any women students?
No. There were no women allowed in the college.
Yeah, yeah. But I thought that at some
professional schools, some women... Oh, at other
schools there were. There were women from Iowa,
there were women from Kansas State, there were
women from Philadelphia, there were women from
Colorado.
In fact, there were two girls in school at the time I
was back in 1930, in the 1930s. At Kansas State.
Yeah. Mm-hmm. When were the first women allowed?
You'll have to check. I believe Dr. Rutter let them
in, what, in 1960? I don't know. I know I didn't have
any women in any of my classes. Okay, okay. Okay,
how about blacks? Any blacks in the student body? I
mean in the veterinary college. That's something
I've never been able to understand.
Blacks are not particularly interested in blood
and medicine. There's, to my knowledge, there's
never been a black, I mean, during my teaching
years, there was never a black in school. Kansas
State, when I was there in the 30s, there was only
one black boy and he flunked out his freshman year.
No, there were two. One of them was Ted Williams,
the lady with the There were only two that I knew
then. And
they've been made the same way, American Veteran
Medical Association. We have enough women to have
an organization of their own, but there's no
blacks to speak of. Oh, I imagine it'd be less than
1% if I had to guess. I doubt it's that high. They
want to, I don't know. I'm just talking off the top
of my head now. It seems to me like they, They want to
be lawyers or doctors or something else. But their
medicine just don't appeal to them. And I don't
know why because I've known some black stable men
out here at college that were really magicians
with animals. I know one man in particular who used
to go into a horse stall with a rough heart and he'd
quiet him down, talk baby talk to him and bring him
out with no trouble at all.
Come to think of it, there's not even too many black
jockeys. There aren't, no. I don't know why. No, I
don't either. I don't know why. You have to ask a
black man. Okay. But we've never had blacks. Now,
they may have been one or two going through the
years since I left there 12 years
ago. As far as the students... What did you think
the overall quality of the students, I know you
talked about that they were hard workers, but the
overall quality and intelligence, et cetera, did
that change? Well, I think it changed for the
better because, I don't know, about 20 years ago,
15, everybody decided bed and medicine was a good
deal. I don't know why. That's always been a
mystery to me. When I went to Kansas State, there
were 40 boys in my class. And about 10 of them were
Kansans. The rest of them were out of state.
And yet, all of a sudden, they came to the rest to get
the veterinary medicine if they had to put a quote
on it. And they not only put a quote.